           Audit Report




   Comptroller of Maryland
     Compliance Division


            May 2024




  OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
  MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
                              Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
     Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair)    Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
               Senator Joanne C. Benson                    Delegate Steven J. Arentz
              Senator Paul D. Corderman                Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
               Senator Katie Fry Hester                   Delegate Steven C. Johnson
              Senator Shelly L. Hettleman                 Delegate Mary A. Lehman
               Senator Cheryl C. Kagan                       Delegate David Moon
               Senator Cory V. McCray                    Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
                Senator Justin D. Ready                  Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
             Senator Bryan W. Simonaire                  Delegate M. Courtney Watson
                Senator Craig J. Zucker                          One Vacancy




                                    To Obtain Further Information
                                       Office of Legislative Audits
                                     The Warehouse at Camden Yards
                                    351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
                                       Baltimore, Maryland 21201
                                           Phone: 410-946-5900
                                           Maryland Relay: 711
                                    TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
                                    E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
                                      Website: www.ola.state.md.us



                                           To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.


                                        Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.
                                     May 3, 2024


Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland

Ladies and Gentlemen:

We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Compliance Division for the period beginning March 18, 2019 and
ending March 15, 2022. The Division is primarily responsible for enforcement of
all tax laws administered by COM, including those relating to individual income
taxes and business taxes such as corporate income, withholding, and sales and use
taxes. The Division was also responsible for administering the Uniform
Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act.

Our audit disclosed that the Division did not always assess penalties when holders
of unclaimed property failed to remit such property to the Division. During the
audit period such assessments were required by law; however, the applicable law
has since been modified to permit the Division to waive the penalties, yet the
Division had not formalized a policy on the penalty waiver process. In addition,
the Division did not ensure that adjustments to business tax accounts processed by
one Division unit were reviewed by supervisory personnel.

Our audit also disclosed that the Division did not conduct required supervisory
reviews of State payments to taxpayers released from the Liability Intercept
Program, and that the Division only conducted a minimal number of Bay
Restoration Fee audits and excluded the entities that collected the majority of
these fees.

Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that the Division
satisfactorily addressed three of those findings. The remaining two findings are
repeated in this report.
COM’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Division, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all issues.

We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Division. We also wish to acknowledge COM’s and the Division’s willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.


                                            Respectfully submitted,




                                            Gregory A. Hook, CPA
                                            Legislative Auditor




                                        2
                                Table of Contents

    Background Information                                                           4

       Agency Responsibilities                                                       4
       Organizational Change                                                         5
       Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report                                6

    Findings and Recommendations                                                     7

    Unclaimed Property
*     Finding 1 – The Division did not always assess penalties for holders of        7
          unclaimed property that failed to remit such property to the Division.

    Adjustments to Taxpayer Accounts
*      Finding 2 – Adjustments to business taxpayer accounts processed by one        8
          Division unit were not always reviewed by supervisory personnel as
          required.

    Liability Intercept Program
       Finding 3 – The Division did not conduct required supervisory reviews        10
           of State payments to taxpayers released from the Liability Intercept
           Program.

    Bay Restoration Fee
       Finding 4 – The Division only conducted a minimal number of Bay              11
          Restoration Fee audits and excluded the entities that collected the
          majority of these fees.

    Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology                                        12

    Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal          15
       Compliance Audits of Comptroller of Maryland Divisions as of March
       2024

    Agency Response                                                                Appendix




*      Denotes items repeated in full or part from preceding audit report


                                            3
                       Background Information

Agency Responsibilities

The Compliance Division’s primary responsibilities include enforcement of all
tax laws administered by the Comptroller of Maryland (COM), including those
relating to individual income taxes, as well as business taxes such as corporate
income, withholding, and sales and use taxes. Primary functions include
conducting taxpayer audits and investigations, collecting delinquent taxes, and
performing other taxpayer compliance activities. In conjunction with these
functions, the Division levies tax assessments and processes tax appeals.
Collection tools used by the Division include filing tax liens, issuing bank
attachments, employing independent collection agencies, and other steps such as
preventing the renewal of an individual’s driver’s license. The Division uses the
COM’s automated State of Maryland Tax system to access, retrieve, and record
tax data and other information as necessary. The Division was also responsible
for administering the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act.

According to the Division’s records, as of June 30, 2022, outstanding individual
income taxes (excluding interest and penalties) and business taxes that were
subject to collection by the Division totaled approximately $1.0 billion and
$473.4 million, respectively. These amounts represent a significant increase from
prior years. As of June 30, 2019, outstanding individual income taxes (excluding
interest and penalties) and business taxes that were subject to collection by the
Division totaled approximately $617.9 million and $364.3 million, respectively.
Per the Division, the significant increases in outstanding taxes subject to
collection from fiscal year-end 2019 to 2022, were due primarily to the effects of
the COVID pandemic, which delayed collection efforts for an extended period
(March 2020 to August 2021).

According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2022, the Division’s
expenditures totaled approximately $34.5 million (see Figure 1 on the following
page) and collections from its enforcement programs totaled $616.6 million.




                                        4
                          Figure 1
   Division Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
            Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
                                                    Positions   Percent
 Filled                                               323          85.4%
 Vacant                                                45          11.9%
 Frozen                                                  1          0.3%
 Closed                                                  9          2.4%
 Total                                                378

                    Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
                                        Expenditures            Percent
 Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits     $28,372,302              82.3%
 Technical and Special Fees                   249,828               0.7%
 Operating Expenses                         5,865,263              17.0%
 Total                                    $34,487,393

                        Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
                                                Funding         Percent
 General Fund                                  $23,840,845         69.1%
 Special Fund                                    10,646,548        30.9%
 Total                                         $34,487,393

Source: State financial and personnel records




Organizational Change

Effective January 2023, COM transferred the Hearings and Appeals Unit and the
Unclaimed Property Unit from the Compliance Division to a newly formed Law
and Oversight Office, as their own Divisions. The Hearings and Appeals Division
conducts administrative reviews and holds hearings for disputed tax cases. The
Unclaimed Property Division is responsible for administering the Uniform
Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act. The activities of Hearings and Appeals
and Unclaimed Property through March 15, 2022 were included in this audit.




                                                5
 Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report

 Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
 in our preceding audit report dated December 18, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 2,
 we determined that the Division satisfactorily addressed three of these findings.
 The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.


                               Figure 2
                     Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding                                                                 Implementation
                             Finding Description
 Finding                                                                      Status
            The Division did not consistently perform three of its
            available compliance programs designed to identify and           Not repeated
Finding 1
            pursue certain individuals who failed to file required tax
            returns or report all income.
            The Division did not ensure that tax assessments for
            businesses that failed to file required tax returns were
Finding 2                                                                    Not repeated
            prepared and recorded timely in accordance with its
            procedures.
            The Division did not adequately control critical
                                                                              Repeated
Finding 3   adjustments to taxpayer accounts in COM’s automated
                                                                          (Current Finding 2)
            State of Maryland Tax system.
            The Division did not assess penalties, as required by law,
                                                                              Repeated
Finding 4   when holders of unclaimed property failed to remit such
                                                                          (Current Finding 1)
            property to the Division.
            The Division did not ensure that manual calculations of
            interest and penalties included in sales and use tax
Finding 5                                                                    Not repeated
            assessments were accurate, which resulted in incorrect
            interest and penalties being assessed on certain taxpayers.




                                            6
                  Findings and Recommendations

Unclaimed Property

Finding 1
The Division did not always assess penalties when holders of unclaimed
property failed to remit such property to the Division.

Analysis
During the audit period, the Division did not always assess required penalties
when holders of unclaimed property, such as financial institutions and insurance
companies, failed to report and remit the property to the Division. Further, when
the State law that was in place during the audit period that required a penalty
assessment was modified effective October 1, 2022 to permit the Division to
waive penalties, we found that the Division had not formalized a policy or process
for waiving penalties.

State law provides that unclaimed property, such as savings accounts, shall be
reported and remitted by the property holder to the Division annually. In general,
property is assumed to be abandoned when there is no owner contact with the
holder regarding the property for three years. State law in effect during the audit
provided that if unclaimed property is not remitted by the holder when required, a
financial penalty equal to 15 percent of the property value is to be imposed on the
holder. However, we were advised by Division management that the Division’s
unofficial policy had been to not assess this penalty when property is identified by
its independent contractors to maintain a positive working relationship with
property holders.

The Division uses several independent contractors to perform nationwide audits to
help identify and recover unreported unclaimed property owned by Maryland
residents. However, when the contractors identified unclaimed property not
previously reported and remitted, the Division did not assess the required
penalties on the property holder for failing to report and remit the unclaimed
property on their own. According to the Division’s records, between July 2019
and March 2022, unreported unclaimed property totaling approximately $71.5
million was identified by the contractors that was subsequently to be transferred
to the State. The Division’s practice of not assessing penalties resulted in the
State not collecting approximately $10.7 million (15 percent of the value of the
property) from the related property holders for failing to remit the unclaimed
property.




                                         7
Timely submission by holders of unclaimed property is critical to ensure the
Division can facilitate the return of the funds to the rightful owner. Furthermore,
the Division paid commissions totaling $7.6 million (6 to 12 percent of the
identified amount remitted to the State) to the audit contractors during the
aforementioned period. Since these commissions are paid using State funds, the
assessment of penalties would offset the audit costs to the State.

This condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In response to
that report, the Comptroller of Maryland (COM), on behalf of the Division, stated
that by April 2021, it would consult with its legal counsel and seek legislative
sponsorship to amend the law to authorize COM to exercise discretion in waiving
the penalty. In addition, the response indicated that by June 2021, COM would
consult with its counsel to determine the feasibility of retroactively assessing
penalties.

During the 2022 legislative session, the law was amended to permit COM to
waive the 15 percent penalty effective October 1, 2022. However, as noted
above, assessments were waived prior to the law change. In addition, COM had
not established formal written policies and procedures governing when waivers
would be issued or the approval process required for the waivers. Finally, the
Division had not consulted with its counsel regarding the feasibility of retroactive
assessments, during the period prior to the aforementioned law change granting
COM discretion over penalty assessments.

Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Division
a. consult with legal counsel to determine the feasibility of retroactively
   assessing penalties for unremitted unclaimed property identified prior to
   implementation of the aforementioned law (repeat), and
b. develop formal policies and procedures governing waivers of assessments
   including criteria for the waiver and the related approval process.


Adjustments to Taxpayer Accounts

Finding 2
Adjustments to business taxpayer accounts processed by one Division unit
were not always reviewed by supervisory personnel as required.

Analysis
Adjustments to business taxpayer accounts processed by one Division unit were
not always reviewed by supervisory personnel as required by COM procedures.


                                         8
Specifically, we identified 29 months during which required reviews had not been
performed by this unit even though the unit processed adjustments totaling at least
$45.1 million during these months.1 The unit processes adjustments that may
increase or decrease a taxpayer’s liability due to field audits conducted.
Furthermore, our test of ten adjustments that reduced taxpayer liabilities by $4.1
million but had not been reviewed disclosed one adjustment totaling $578,482
that lacked adequate supporting documentation, such as documentation
supporting the accuracy of the amount processed.

Division management advised us that due to limitations with its automated system
it cannot establish online controls over critical adjustments, and instead relies on
supervisory reviews of output reports of critical transactions processed. However,
our review disclosed that supervisory reviews were not performed for any
adjustments processed by the Division unit between November 2019 and
November 2021 and between March 2022 and June 2022.

A similar condition was noted in our two preceding audit reports. In its response
to our preceding report, COM, on behalf of the Division, agreed to ensure that all
critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts are reviewed and approved in
accordance with established procedures by April 2020. As noted above, the
reviews were not completed and the Division did not have a specific reason for
the lack of reviews during the months noted.

Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Division
a. ensure that critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts identified on output
   reports are reviewed by an independent supervisor, and that adequate
   documentation supporting the adjustments and their independent review
   and approval is maintained (repeat); and
b. ensure that adequate supporting documentation is maintained for all
   adjustments processed.




1
    A limitation exists within the automated system used by the Division that prevents the Division
    or us from readily determining the exact total of adjustments processed by the unit.


                                                   9
Liability Intercept Program

Finding 3
The Division did not conduct required supervisory reviews of State payments
to taxpayers released from the Liability Intercept Program.

Analysis
Supervisory reviews of State payments to taxpayers released from the Liability
Intercept Program were not conducted as required. COM can withhold a State
payment to satisfy a liability of $50 or more due to the State. Some or all of the
payment may subsequently be released to the taxpayer after payment of the debt
to the State or in certain other circumstances, such as establishment of a payment
plan. Division employees can unilaterally release payments withheld due to tax
debts, such as those relating to sales and use tax, withholding tax, and corporate
or individual income tax; and consequently, the Division has a policy requiring
daily supervisory review of these released payment transactions.

Our review disclosed that as of March 10, 2023, supervisors had not reviewed
output reports of these released payments since August 16, 2021. According to its
records, the Division released approximately 25,000 payments, each exceeding
$100 and totaling approximately $534.2 million between August 2021 and June
2022. The Division’s written procedures require daily supervisory reviews of
output reports of released payments. The supervisor is to document their review
of one release on every two pages of the report, to help ensure that payments
released were proper. According to Division management, when collection
efforts resumed after the COVID pandemic in August 2021, these reviews were
not performed due to time constraints imposed by implementation of a new tax
system, required system training, and responding to a high volume of taxpayer
correspondence.

Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Division
a. ensure that required supervisory reviews are performed and
   documented, and
b. review released payments during the aforementioned period and take
   corrective action for any unsupported or improper funds released.




                                        10
Bay Restoration Fee

Finding 4
The Division only conducted a minimal number of Bay Restoration Fee
(BRF) audits and excluded the entities that collected the majority of these
fees.

Analysis
The Division only conducted a minimal number of BRF audits and no audits were
conducted of entities that collected the majority of these fees. Specifically, the
Division did not audit local governments or designated billing authorities even
though these entities remitted $300.7 million of the $305.5 million in BRFs
submitted to COM in fiscal year 2022. Of the 217 entities that remitted fees for
that year, we determined that 108 were local governments or designated billing
authorities. Furthermore, according to the Division’s records, overall only 17
audits were conducted between October 2016 and June 2022.

State law provides for the assessment of a BRF for any user of a wastewater
facility, an on-site sewage disposal system, or a holding tank that is located in
Maryland or serves a Maryland user. The amounts of the fees are established in
law and are initially collected by billing authorities authorized by the State’s
Department of Environment, which include local governments and designated
billing authorities, as well as private entities, such as a condominium association
or a mobile home park. All fees are forwarded to COM on a quarterly basis,
along with a return form specifying fees due and collected for deposit into the
State’s Bay Restoration Fund to provide funding for upgrading wastewater
treatment facilities.

The Division conducts periodic audits of the entities that initially collect the fees
to help ensure that the required fees are collected and forwarded to COM.
Division management advised us that the BRF audits historically have not
generated significant recoveries. However, as noted above, the most material
entities are not subject to audit, and the number of audits is limited. During our
audit period 10 BRF audits were conducted, including 8 that resulted in
assessments totaling $270,358.

Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Division develop a formal plan to subject all entities
collecting BRFs to audit, including those noted above, which considers
factors such as materiality, risk, and prior audit findings.




                                          11
           Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Compliance Division for the period beginning March 18, 2019 and
ending March 15, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.

As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Division’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.

In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the identification, assessment, and collection of
individual income taxes and various business taxes; and the identification,
collection, and distribution of unclaimed property. We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.

Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Division by
COM – Office of the Comptroller. These support services (such as processing of
invoices, maintenance of accounting records, human resources, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audit of the Office of the
Comptroller. In addition, our audit did not include certain support services
provided to the Division by COM – Central Payroll Bureau, effective January 1,
2018. These support services (payroll processing) are included within the scope
of our audit of the Central Payroll Bureau since that date. Furthermore, our audit
did not include certain support services provided to the Division by COM –
Information Technology Division related to the monitoring of information
technology equipment and services and the operation of the Annapolis Data
Center. The operation of the Annapolis Data Center includes the development
and maintenance of Division applications and maintenance of the operating
system and security software environment. These support services are included in
the scope of our audit of the Information Technology Division.

Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit


                                         12
period of March 18, 2019 to March 15, 2022, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.

To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Division’s operations.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.

We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data), as well as from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate
Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The extracts are performed as
part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits
and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that
the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes
the data were used during this audit.

We also extracted data from COM’s automated State of Maryland Tax system,
and the systems used by the Division to account for and monitor unclaimed
property and business tax collections for the purpose of testing certain areas, such
as collection activity and the disposition of unclaimed property. We performed
various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.

The Division’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,


                                         13
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Division, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.

Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.

Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.

This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Division’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Division that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.

The response from COM, on behalf of the Division, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise COM regarding the results of our review of its response.




                                        14
                                Exhibit 1
            Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
     Fiscal Compliance Audits of Comptroller of Maryland Divisions
                                      As of March 2024
    Name of Audit                            Areas Covered                      Most Recent
                                                                                Report Date
                              Processing, evaluating, verifying, and
    Revenue Administration     recording of tax data as reported by taxpayers
1                              and other parties                                  01/22/24
    Division
                              Collection of tax receipts
                              Distribution of tax refunds
                              Management of the State payroll system
                              Non-budgeted funds maintained for payroll
                               deductions
2   Central Payroll Bureau    Critical information systems                       10/05/23
                              Support services to other units of the
                               Comptroller for processing payroll
                               timekeeping records
                              Procurement
                              Equipment
    Information Technology    Support services to other units of the
3   Division (Fiscal           Comptroller for monitoring information             02/02/22
    Operations)                technology related services and maintaining
                               information technology equipment inventory
                               records
    Field Enforcement         Confiscated property
4                             Business licenses                                  09/07/21
    Bureau
                              Routine inspections
                              State agency vendor payment processing
    General Accounting        Vendor table maintenance
5                                                                                 11/09/20
    Division                  State agency working funds
                              Corporate purchasing card program
    Information Technology    Maintenance and monitoring of mainframe
6   Division – Annapolis       operating system, various security functions,      07/27/20
    Data Center Operations     and critical databases
                                Capital grants monitoring
    Office of the               Procurement and disbursements
    Comptroller                 Corporate purchasing cards
7                                                                                 08/29/19
    Bureau of Revenue           Support services to other divisions of the
    Estimates                    Comptroller, such as processing invoices,
                                 maintenance of accounting records, human
                                 resources, and related fiscal functions



                                              15
                                              APPENDIX

                                                                                        Brooke E. Lierman
                                                                                           Comptroller

                                                                                      Edward F. Wykowski III
                                                                                             Director
                                                                                        Compliance Division

                                              April 12, 2024


Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201

Dear Mr. Hook:

       Enclosed is the Comptroller of Maryland’s response to your fiscal compliance audit report of the
Comptroller of Maryland – Compliance Division for the period beginning March 18, 2019 and ending March
15, 2022.

       We have carefully reviewed each finding and believe that our written responses satisfy each
recommendation in the report. If any additional information is needed, please contact Lindsay Welsh,
Deputy Director – Compliance Division at lwelsh@marylandtaxes.gov or by phone at 410-260-6156.

        The Comptroller appreciates your objective and fair appraisal of our operations and the associated
recommendations made for improvement. We would also like to commend your audit team for their
professionalism during the audit, and for performing a thorough review of the Compliance Division.



___________________________                              April 12, 2024
                                                         ________________
Compliance Director                                      Date




___________________________                              04/16/2024
                                                         ________________
Agency Head                                              Date




        301 W Preston Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21201 410-767-1555 1-800-552-3941 (MD) www.marylandtaxes.gov
        Fax: 410-767-1310 Maryland Relay 711 TTY 410-260-7157 compliance@marylandtaxes.gov
                              Comptroller of Maryland
                                Compliance Division
                                  Agency Response Form

       Unclaimed Property

       Finding 1
       The Division did not always assess penalties when holders of unclaimed
       property failed to remit such property to the Division.

       We recommend that the Division
       a. consult with legal counsel to determine the feasibility of retroactively
          assessing penalties for unremitted unclaimed property identified prior to
          implementation of the aforementioned law (repeat), and
       b. develop formal policies and procedures governing waivers of assessments
          including criteria for the waiver and the related approval process.

                                       Agency Response
Analysis                Factually Accurate
Please provide         The finding is factually accurate in the sense that penalties were not
additional comments as always assessed during the audit period. It is important to note that
deemed necessary.      amendments to the statute (Commercial Law, § 17-323) effective
                          October 1, 2022, gave the Comptroller (COM) discretion to waive
                          penalties when holders of unclaimed property failed to remit such
                          property.
Recommendation 1a Agree                                Estimated Completion Date:       04/30/24
Please provide details of The Unclaimed Property Division has already met with the Office of the
corrective action or      Attorney General to determine the feasibility and appropriateness of
explain disagreement. collecting retroactive penalties. After receiving advice from the Office of
                          the Attorney General and analyzing practical considerations, the
                          Division decided not to pursue retroactive assessments of penalties.
                          However, the COM will establish a policy governing the discretionary
                          assessment of penalties prospectively by April 30, 2024.
Recommendation 1b Agree                                Estimated Completion Date:       04/30/24
Please provide details of The Unclaimed Property Division met with the COM’s policy team on
corrective action or      Friday, September 15, 2023, to begin the process of establishing formal
explain disagreement. policies and procedures governing waivers of assessments, including
                          criteria for the waiver and the related approval process.




                                          Page 1 of 6
                               Comptroller of Maryland
                                 Compliance Division
                                  Agency Response Form

      Adjustments to Taxpayer Accounts

      Finding 2
      Adjustments to business taxpayer accounts processed by one Division unit
      were not always reviewed by supervisory personnel as required.

      We recommend that the Division
      a. ensure that critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts identified on output
         reports are reviewed by an independent supervisor, and that adequate
         documentation supporting the adjustments and their independent review
         and approval is maintained (repeat); and
      b. ensure that adequate supporting documentation is maintained for all
         adjustments processed.

                                       Agency Response
Analysis                Factually Accurate
Please provide         The Division agrees that during the timeframe referenced, it did not
additional comments as always follow its normal cadence of adjustment reviews by an
deemed necessary.      independent supervisor or manager. It is also true that the Division
                        agreed to review all critical adjustments according to its procedures by
                        April 2020 in the last audit report, however, at that time, we were not
                        aware that a worldwide pandemic would begin just one month prior to
                        the date we agreed to implement this action by. In fact, the Division’s
                        normal operations were severely destabilized for more than 15 months of
                        the current audit period due to the COVID-19 pandemic. During this
                        time, the section OLA refers to in Finding 2 was tasked with multiple
                        projects unrelated to their normal scope of work, while also trying to
                        manage the wellbeing and safety of its staff. Examples of additional
                        tasks and projects assigned to this section during the pandemic included
                        the following:

                               New Tax System Training: Preparation for Release 1 Alcohol
                                Tax & Corporate Tax.
                               MD Relief Act 2021: Entire available staff was assisting with
                                answering emails and questions as well as researching the status
                                regarding the receipt/non receipt of taxpayer relief act payments.
                               MD Gas Tax Holiday: Staff reviewed, researched, and approved
                                gas tax holiday applications for approval or denial of gas tax
                                refunds and continuously communicated results of findings to
                                other divisions of the Agency.

                                          Page 2 of 6
                                Comptroller of Maryland
                                  Compliance Division
                                   Agency Response Form

                                Commerce Project: Relief Act related Grants & Loans; staff were
                                 temporarily assigned to assist the Department of Commerce in
                                 reviewing and supporting in the approval of grant applications.
                                Assistance to the General Accounting Division: Performed
                                 research payment of Relief Act Funds.
                                Assistance to the Revenue Administration Division: Aided in
                                 processing Relief Act Funds payments.
                                Assistance to the Department of Labor: Aided in processing
                                 unemployment claims.

                        Additionally, the adjustments referenced in this finding are typically
                        based on an audit and always have corresponding audit packets which
                        include several levels of documented reviews and approvals; this applies
                        to audit assessments which both increase and reduce liabilities. The
                        Division provided samples of such audit files with documented
                        assessment and refund approvals to the Office of Legislative Audits
                        during the audit.

Recommendation 2a Agree                              Estimated Completion Date:          9/30/24
Please provide details of The Division agrees to update its adjustment review procedures to
corrective action or      ensure that a reasonable number of critical adjustments identified on
explain disagreement. output reports are reviewed by a supervisor or manager. Documentation
                          of such reviews and approvals will be maintained for audit purposes.
Recommendation 2b Agree                              Estimated Completion Date:          4/30/24
Please provide details of The Division agrees to continue to retain documentation to substantiate
corrective action or      its adjustments.
explain disagreement.




                                           Page 3 of 6
                                Comptroller of Maryland
                                  Compliance Division
                                     Agency Response Form

       Liability Intercept Program

       Finding 3
       The Division did not conduct required supervisory reviews of State payments
       to taxpayers released from the Liability Intercept Program.

       We recommend that the Division
       a.    ensure that required supervisory reviews are performed and
             documented, and
       b.    review released payments during the aforementioned period and take
             corrective action for any unsupported or improper funds released.

                                          Agency Response
Analysis                  Factually Accurate
Please provide         OLA determined that the supervisory review of the “Vendor Liability Offset
additional comments as Release Control Report (LORCR)” was not conducted as required for several
deemed necessary.      months. The Compliance Division agrees that the reviews were not completed
                       due to an abnormal volume of high priority tasks that directly impacted the
                       taxpayer community following the resumption of collection actions in August
                       2021 when the Governor’s Executive Order related to the suspension of
                       collection activities due to COVID-19 had expired.
                       The staff that work the Liability Intercept Program are trained to release
                       payments if they meet one of the following criteria: there are enough funds
                       already being held to cover the liability, taxpayer is on a payment plan, or there
                       is a pending adjustment to remove the liability.

Recommendation 3a Agree                                Estimated Completion Date:          Completed
Please provide details of The LORCR is now being stored on an electronic document storage system and
corrective action or      two resources have been identified to make sure these reviews are completed in
explain disagreement. a timely fashion.


Recommendation 3b Agree                                Estimated Completion Date:          Completed
Please provide details of Reviews for the months of August 2021 through February 2024 have been
corrective action or      completed. Throughout this review, no improper releases have been identified
explain disagreement. based on the criteria noted above.




                                             Page 4 of 6
                              Comptroller of Maryland
                                Compliance Division
                                   Agency Response Form

       Bay Restoration Fee

       Finding 4
       The Division only conducted a minimal number of Bay Restoration Fee
       (BRF) audits and excluded the entities that collected the majority of these
       fees.

       We recommend that the Division develop a formal plan to subject all entities
       collecting BRFs to audit, including those noted above, which considers
       factors such as materiality, risk, and prior audit findings.

                                        Agency Response
Analysis                Factually Accurate
Please provide         For context, it’s important to note that entities which collect the majority
additional comments as of BRF fees are not exempt from audit. These entities were simply not
deemed necessary.      picked up for audit during the OLA audit period.

                        The Division completes a formal comprehensive audit plan annually
                        which addresses audit planning topics for each of the tax and fee types
                        required to be audited. This plan includes its own BRF section with
                        background information, audit stats, goals, and audit selection
                        methodology. In addition, the Division routinely performs BRF
                        delinquency collection runs which identify any entity required to file and
                        pay BRFs that has not done so during the given period of the run.
                        Between the audits and collection activities the Division performs for
                        BRF, we feel that we adequately ensure compliance for this tax type.

                        Furthermore, during the audit period, the Division was placed under the
                        Governor’s Pandemic Emergency Declaration which prevented it from
                        conducting any new audits for 15 consecutive months, from March 23,
                        2020, through July 1, 2021. There were also only two BRF auditors on
                        staff as of FY22 and those same two auditors were responsible for
                        conducting Unclaimed Property, Withholding Tax, and BRF audits.
                        Lastly, audit staff were charged with assisting with the same projects
                        outlined in our response to Finding 2 during the timeframe referenced.
Recommendation 4        Agree                       Estimated Completion Date:         7/01/24




                                           Page 5 of 6
                              Comptroller of Maryland
                                Compliance Division
                                   Agency Response Form

Please provide details of The Division agrees to add elements of materiality, risk, and prior audit
corrective action or      findings to the existing formal audit plan beginning with the plan for
explain disagreement. FY25.




                                           Page 6 of 6
         AUDIT TEAM
   Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
        Audit Manager

    Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager


     James M. Fowler, CFE
        Senior Auditor

         Charles O. Price
Information Systems Senior Auditor


       Matthew P. Henry
       Daniel G. Johnson
       Yuvaraj N. Sharma
         Staff Auditors
